82
0278-0097/19©2019IEEE
IEEE TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY MAGAZINE      ∕   S E P T E M B E R  2 0 1 9
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/MTS.2019.2930273 
Date of publication: 30 August 2019
Siddique Latif, Adnan Qayyum, Muhammad Usama, Junaid Qadir,  
Andrej Zwitter, and Muhammad Shahzad
Caveat Emptor
ISTOCK/LAGARTOFILM
B
ig Data” has the potential to facilitate sustainable development in many 
sectors of life such as education, health, agriculture, and in combating hu-
manitarian crises and violent conflicts. However, lurking beneath the im-
mense promises of Big Data are some significant risks such as 1) the po-
tential use of Big Data for unethical ends; 2) its ability to mislead through 
reliance on unrepresentative and biased data; and 3) the various privacy 
and security challenges associated with data (including the danger of an 
adversary tampering with the data to harm people). These risks can have severe conse-
quences and a better understanding of these risks is the first step towards their mitigation 
The Risks of Using Big Data for Human Development
“
Authorized licensed use limited to: National University Fast. Downloaded on April 30,2024 at 05:56:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
83
S E P T E M B E R  2 0 1 9    ∕      IEEE TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY MAGAZINE
of these risks. In this article, we highlight the poten-
tial dangers associated with using Big Data, particu-
larly for human development.
Data Deluge
Over the last decades, widespread adoption of digital 
applications has moved all aspects of human lives 
into the digital sphere. The commoditization of the 
data collection process due to increased digitization 
has resulted in a “data deluge” that continues to inten-
sify with a number of Internet companies dealing with 
petabytes of data on a daily basis. The term “Big 
Data” has been coined to refer to our emerging ability 
to collect, process, and analyze the massive amount 
of data being generated from multiple sources in 
order to obtain previously inaccessible insights. Big 
Data can equip policy and decision makers with evi-
dence-based actionable insights that can help in 
enhancing social systems, tracking development prog-
ress, and in developing a nuanced understanding of 
the effects of policies without being swayed by intu-
ition, ideologies, or emotions.
In particular, the recent advances in Machine Learn-
ing (ML) and Artificial Intelligence (AI) techniques have 
revolutionized intelligent data analytics resulting in 
enhanced interest in using Big Data for (sustainable 
human and social) development (BD4D). Many organiza-
tions and government institutions are exploring such 
solutions in diverse fields such as healthcare, educa-
tion, intelligence, fraud, and crime prevention [5].
Although Big Data technology offers great promise 
[3], it is worth remembering that Big Data is not a silver 
bullet and we may ignore the hard-earned statistical les-
sons on measurement bias, data quality, and inference 
variation that have been earned through a hard toil and 
sometimes, bitter experience only at our own peril. 
While most writing on data is enthusiastic, new work 
has started emerging that has begun to show how Big 
Data can mislead and be used detrimentally [7], [20], 
[36]. More than 50 years of research into artificial intelli-
gence and statistical learning has shown that there is no 
free lunch — i.e., there are no universally applicable 
solutions [50] and that there are always trade-offs 
involved [47].
The use of BD4D is transforming society in various 
domains from education to prevention, diagnosis, and 
treatment of illness [16]. It has improved the efficiency 
and effectiveness of disaster management systems by 
utilizing real-time community information [39]. In these 
applications, data is emerging as a new economic 
resource and used by companies, governments, and 
even individuals to optimize everything [31]. The ulti-
mate goal of the development sector seems to be what 
is referred to as forecast-based financing — a 
prediction-based and automatized funding and logistical 
system based on big data analytics and smart contracts 
that automatizes everything from funding to action in 
the field [53].
Despite the great excitement around the Big Data 
trend, Big Data is also pegged with criticism. The dark 
side of Big Data is that data invariably contains some 
biases and there is a fear that Big Data could erode pri-
vacy and threaten freedom when deployed for human 
and social development. These issues become particu-
larly serious, when Big Data is deployed for human sub-
jects in the case of BD4D. For example, consider the 
case where Big Data predictions about individuals are 
used to punish people on their propensities rather than 
on their actions. This denies human free will and their 
capability to improve over time and effectively reinforc-
es existing stereotypes [24].
Various studies have articulated common issues that 
concern Big Data analytics interdisciplinary research 
[13], [19], [33], [44] but a critical analysis of BD4D is 
missing in the literature. Therefore, in this paper, we 
discuss the caveats of Big Data analytics when it is 
used for human development purposes. The purpose of 
this article is to present a critical synthesis of the 
diverse literature and put together various underlying 
issues that affect BD4D significantly. In addition to criti-
cally evaluating BD4D risks, this paper also explores 
potential remedies that can help mitigate the problems 
of BD4D.
General Issues in Using Data for Decisions
Today, big corporations are investing their resources in 
utilizing Big Data technology to uncover important cor-
relations, customer preferences, market trends, and 
other hidden patterns that can help boost their produc-
tion efficiency by providing data-driven products and 
services. Despite these great opportunities, Big Data 
has come with a raft of potential challenges and pitfalls 
that need to be considered. Some of them are dis-
cussed next.
Big Data is Reductionist
Big Data provides a granular view of extremely complex 
and historically unprecedented problems by using par-
ticular vantage points from the available data. It only 
focuses on specific types of questions, and seeks their 
answers in a reductionist way by seemingly ignoring 
concrete contextual realities about human societies and 
places. It is also crude and reductionist in its techniques 
and algorithms by sacrificing complexity, specificity, 
and deep contextual knowledge [26]. In this way, analy-
ses are reduced to simple outputs that critically ignore 
the underlying complexity of the actual processes and 
entities being modeled.
Authorized licensed use limited to: National University Fast. Downloaded on April 30,2024 at 05:56:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
84
IEEE TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY MAGAZINE      ∕   S E P T E M B E R  2 0 1 9
Big Data is not Neutral nor is it Objective
One of the compelling aspects of Big Data is the assump-
tion that it is eliminating human subjectivity and bias. 
Although the idea of “baggage-free” learning is seductive, 
data alone is not enough since there is no learning with-
out knowledge as a practical consequence of the “no free 
lunch” theorem. Big Data analytics is what mathemati-
cians call an ill-posed problem, thus no unique model 
exists
1; the only way to resolve some ill-posed problems 
is to make additional assumptions. These assumptions 
are subjective and can be thought of as being “opinions 
embedded in Math” [36]. Therefore, while data is often 
considered neutral, data collection techniques and analy-
sis methods are designed by humans based on their 
knowledge, experience, and beliefs.
The German philosopher Heidegger wrote,
“Everywhere we remain unfree and chained to 
technology, whether we passionately affirm or deny 
it. But we are delivered over to it in the worst possi-
ble way when we regard it as something neutral.”
Big Data scientists make computations using data 
and present results about people in terms of numbers 
or mathematical relations based on layers upon layers 
of assumptions. Data scientists use this data and try to 
organize it into objects, relations, and events, and in 
doing so invariably analyze the data within the back-
drop of their subjectivity and partiality. Moreover, it is 
challenging to ensure fairness in ML algorithms due to 
significant statistical limitations and it is possible that 
enforcing fairness can harm the very groups that these 
algorithms were supposed to protect [10].
Opaque Black-Box Models
Many of the modern mathematical models used for Big 
Data analysis are opaque — and unregulated [36]. 
These models are often used inappropriately and can 
scale up biases thereby producing misleading results. 
Such models have even been referred to as “weapons of 
maths destruction” (WMD) due to their inscrutable black 
box nature. These WMDs can cause havoc/harm and 
tend to punish the poor due to vicious feedback loops 
[36]. The reliance on opaque algorithmic black boxes for 
decision making is even more problematic when we 
consider how easy it is for adversaries to attack ML 
models. New research attacks have emerged in which 
adversaries can trick ML models to make decisions as 
they desire — something that has huge consequences 
for a society in which human decisions are automated 
and made by machines.
Big Data’s Big Bias Problem
Most Big Data datasets contain hidden biases both in 
collection and analysis stage. These biases in data can 
create an illusion of reality. These biases are hard to 
undo and their elimination have unintended conse-
quences on the results. Four major biases of Big Data 
are described as follows.
Sampling Bias: When the samples are partial, selec-
tive, and not random, the patterns of omitted informa-
tion may influence the structures discovered in the 
data. Such samples will be unable to accurately predict 
the outcomes and will have reduced validity [38]. Such 
bias is often found when we focus on sentiment analysis 
on social media, safety monitoring using social media, 
or use population statistics and tourism statistics.
Activity Bias: This is another bias that is usually 
encountered in web data [29]. This arises from the time-
based correlation of users’ activities across diverse web-
sites, because most of the users visit a website for a 
while and never return during the measurement period. 
This can be explained using the example of the model 
of Ginsberg et al. [18] for predicting flu cases. Using 50 
million Google search terms, the model suffered from 
activity bias where it started over-predicting the flu in 
the U.S. [9], [28].
Information Bias: This refers to the delusion that 
more information always results in better decisions. 
Data scientists give too much significance on the vol-
ume of data and ignore other alternative opinions and 
solutions. The irony of this belief is that fewer data can 
give better decisions in some situations. In various 
cases, a simple rule of thumb can work better than 
complex analysis. There are situations where ignorance 
from very large data and required calculation can pro-
vide more accurate and faster results because large 
biased data just magnify the errors. Having more infor-
mation is not always more desirable.
Inductive Bias (Assuming the Future Will be Like the 
Past): In Big Data analysis, there is an implicit belief that 
the future can always be extrapolated based on histori-
cal data. Apart from this approach being philosophically 
1A famous statistical quote by George Box is, “All models are wrong, some 
are useful.”
An uncritical acceptance and 
careless application of Big Data 
methods can adversely affect human 
welfare and development.
Authorized licensed use limited to: National University Fast. Downloaded on April 30,2024 at 05:56:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
85
S E P T E M B E R  2 0 1 9    ∕      IEEE TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY MAGAZINE
debatable (cf., the “Problem of Induction”), such an 
approach can empirically backfire in many cases and 
result in invalid, misleading, or unhelpful analyses.
Fooled by the “Big Noise”
In [43], the author Nate Silver notes that even though 
data is increasing globally by 2.5 quintillion bytes 
each day, useful information is of course not increas-
ing commensurately. This means that most of the 
data is just noise and that noise is increasing faster 
than useful information. A related problem is that of 
the curse of dimensionality, where the more dimen-
sions one works with, the less effective standard 
computational and statistical techniques become, 
which has serious repercussions when we are dealing 
with Big Data. As more data is generated and collect-
ed, the complexity, deviations, variance (or noise) 
and the number of potential false findings grow expo-
nentially compared to the information (or signal). 
This spurious rise in data can mislead us to fake sta-
tistical relationships.
Another point of concern is that a plethora of hypoth-
eses are tested using a single data in Big Data analytics, 
which opens the door for spurious correlations. When 
a large number of hypotheses are tested, it becomes 
highly likely that some false results will become statisti-
cally significant, which can mislead Big Data practitio-
ners if they are not careful. The proper way to formulate 
a hypothesis is before the experiment not after it. 
 
It is necessary to understand that the statistical signifi-
cance under an inaccurate method is totally specious — 
i.e., significance tests do not protect against “data 
dredging” [45].
Apart from the problem of spurious correlations, Big 
Data analysts can also become guilty of cherry picking. 
In this phenomenon, scientists tend to focus on finding 
support for their hypotheses and beliefs while overlook-
ing other evidence. As a result, they only present posi-
tive results of their experiments that endorse their 
hypothesis or argument instead of reporting all of the 
findings [34]. In this way, Big Data provide a relatively 
small advantage to improve public strategies, policies, 
and operations with minimum public benefit [8].
Are Big Data Predictions Generalizable?
In Big Data analytics, datasets are mostly gathered 
from observational sources instead of a strict statisti-
cal experiment. This poses the question of the gener-
alizability of the insights learned from this data, 
notwithstanding the large size of the dataset. Even 
though we know that statistically speaking the dis-
crepancy in an estimate decreases with an increase 
in the sample size as Bernoulli proved, but the messi-
ness of real-world data in terms of incompleteness, 
imbalance, hidden bias, rareness, large variances, 
outliers, and non-independent, identically distributed 
(IID) nature, means that simply getting more data is 
not sufficient. Disregard for the messiness of the real-
world data can mislead us into problems such as mul-
tiple testing, regression to the mean, selection bias, 
and over-interpretation of causal associations [36]. 
Also we must note that certain things are not precise-
ly predictable (e.g., chaotic processes, complex sys-
tems, the so-called black swans) no matter how much 
data is available.
In BD4D applications, large administrative databases 
may have obscure/indeterminate data quality, limited 
information about confounding variables, and subopti-
mal documentation of the outcome measures; careful 
attention should be given to the generalizability of the 
learned insights.
Data in the Field of Development
Ethical Use of Data and Privacy Issues
Big Data opens frightening opportunities for unscrupu-
lous people, group, government, or organizations to 
use users’ personal data against them for evil purpos-
es as various facets of human lives are being digitized 
[7]. Privacy depends on the nature and characteristics 
of data, the context in which it was created, and the 
norms and expectations of people [7]. Therefore, it is 
necessary to situate and contextualize data in such a 
way that minimizes privacy breaches without affecting 
its usefulness.
Big Data can bring more transparency both for indi-
viduals and organizations by introducing user anony-
mization but there are numerous examples when data is 
thought to be anonymous but its combination with 
other variables resulted in unexpected re-identification 
[2], [27], [42]. For example, it has been proved that four 
spatiotemporal points are sufficient to uniquely identify 
95% of the individuals in a dataset where the location of 
an individual is specified hourly with a spatial resolution 
given by the carrier’s antennas [11]. In another similar 
study, Latanya Sweeney [46] argued that 87% of all 
Big Data provides opportunities 
for unscrupulous people, groups, 
government, or organizations to use 
users’ personal data against them.
Authorized licensed use limited to: National University Fast. Downloaded on April 30,2024 at 05:56:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
86
IEEE TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY MAGAZINE      ∕   S E P T E M B E R  2 0 1 9
Americans could be uniquely recognized using only 
three bits of information: zip code, birth date, and sex. 
The datasets being released today are anonymized by 
applying ad hoc de-identification methods. Therefore, 
the possibility of re-identification depends heavily on 
the advancement of re-identification methods and avail-
ability of the auxiliary datasets to an adversary. Thus, 
the chances of privacy breaches in the future are essen-
tially uncertain.
The all-important consideration to be accounted for is 
how the collection of data may affect a person’s well-
being and dignity, and to ensure that basic human rights 
and human freedom are not impinged upon. We should 
work actively to minimize potential risks related to the 
release of private confidential information, and the mali-
cious use of data (potentially by unauthorized agents).
Quality Of Statistics — Numbers are Soft,  
and Incentives Matter
Data is not simply information that is harvested from an 
objective context. It should be an institutionally, cultur-
ally, and socially shaped product. Collecting good quali-
ty data for development is in practice very costly as we 
need resources and manpower for data collection, 
maintenance, and monitoring [22]. For instance, the 
aggregate statistic for Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 
many sub-Saharan African countries is often measured 
approximately since most African countries are simply 
unable to collect all the information needed to calculate 
GDP accurately and changes are approximately inferred 
from rainfall figures or population growth [21]. The use 
of this data can lead to distorted or misleading policy 
decisions by development agencies and governments 
and can contribute to the underestimation of GDP and 
bewildering fallouts such as the following:
1)	 In November 2010, Ghana’s Statistics Service anno­
unced an estimated GDP that was off from its true 
value, resulting in an upward adjustment of a whop-
ping 60%, which was enough to change Ghana’s 
status from a low-income country to a lower middle-
income country [23];
2)	 Similar adjustments were made in Nigeria in April 2014 
where the rise was almost 90%, which caused the 
total GDP of sub-Saharan Africa to rise by 20% [21].
But where did these overnight growth spurts come 
from? And what to say about the fate of the analysis and 
policies of the various policymakers and development 
professionals that were based on the previous miscalcu-
lated data — and the cost of this misplaced analysis? 
The official statistics are often missing, incomplete, 
dated, or unreliable. Given such concerns, researchers 
have argued that the numbers cannot be taken at face 
value for development data from a place like Africa, 
resulting in what has been called “Africa’s statistical 
tragedy” [21].
Pitfalls of Self-Monitoring of States
In the modern world, almost every government tightly 
controls what kind of information is disseminated 
about the state. An important aspect of the self-moni-
toring of states is that it often becomes a farce because 
people cannot keep their own score. The official statis-
tics measured by the government must be accepted 
with a pinch of salt since governments are spinning 
these numbers in ways that project the country’s prog-
ress positively since the legitimacy of the state depends 
on the popular understanding of the country’s prog-
ress. The anthropologist James Scott in his book “See-
ing Like a State” [41] describes the ways in which 
governments, in their fetish for quantification and data, 
end up making people’s lives miserable rather than bet-
ter. As development projects initiated by the states are 
aimed at improving human lives, an appropriate mea-
sure for the development must be how much effort is 
expended on minimizing the risks associated with data 
collection and analysis.
Human Systems Have Complex Loops  
with Predictions Being Self-Fulfilling
Human social systems are complex adaptive systems 
with multi-loop nonlinear feedback in which actions per-
formed for some purpose can lead to quite different 
unexpected and unintended consequences. We will 
use two examples to illustrate the 1) unintended 
consequences and 2) self-fulfilling nature of interven-
tions in complex social systems.
For our first example, consider the Cobra effect as an 
example of an incident in which an intervention crafted 
to ameliorate a problem actually aggravated it by pro-
ducing some unintended consequences. During the Brit-
ish colonial rule of India, the government devised a 
bounty system for combating the rise of venomous 
cobras. The system worked successfully initially and lots 
of snakes were killed for the reward but entrepreneurs 
The all-important consideration to  
be accounted for is how the collection 
of data may affect a person’s  
well-being and dignity.
Authorized licensed use limited to: National University Fast. Downloaded on April 30,2024 at 05:56:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
87
S E P T E M B E R  2 0 1 9    ∕      IEEE TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY MAGAZINE
soon figured out that they could make money by farm-
ing cobras and killing more of them. The government, 
on learning about this, scrapped the system but ended 
up with a situation in which there were more cobras 
after the intervention than before.
For our second example, consider the Paper Town 
effect. In the 20th century, a famous map of New York 
was created by cartographers Lindberg and Alpers, who 
cleverly embedded a fake city Agloe into their map. 
Agloe, NY, was not a real town. It was a paper town — a 
booby trap to catch plagiarizers. A few years after Lind-
berg and Alpers set their map trap, the fake town 
appeared on another map by the cartographer Rand 
McNally, prompting the two mapmakers to sue for copy-
right infringement. Eventually it was discovered that a 
real town called Agloe had in fact emerged in New York2 
since users of the Linberg Alpers map thought that the 
Agloe that once existed must have gone missing and 
rebuilt it, and that Rand McNally may not have after all 
have plagiarized Lindberg and Alpers.
Missing Data Problem
Missing data is a big problem for development statis-
tics. It has been reported by Jerven that around half 
of the 82 low-income countries have had one or par-
tial poverty surveys within the past decade [21]. Kai-
ser Fung, in his book Numbersense [15], discourages 
the assumption that we have everything and says: “N = 
All is often an assumption rather than a fact about 
the data.” Due to missing data problem, any ranking 
of such countries based on GDP only will be mislead-
ing because of the uneven use of methods and 
access to data. Handling missing data is very impor-
tant for data mining processes as missing observa-
tions can significantly affect the performance of the 
model [32]. Therefore, analysts should handle the 
missing patterns by employing appropriate methods 
to cope with it and to avoid the “streetlight effect.” 
The streetlight effect is the trend adopted by 
researchers to study what is easy to study. The street-
light effect is a major issue that keeps Big Data find-
ings from being realistically useful for human 
development — especially when findings are yielded 
using user-generated and easily available data.
Some Remedies
Interpretable AI and Big Data Analysis
With the wide adoption of deep learning and ensemble 
methods, modern AI systems have become complex 
and opaque and increasingly operate as black boxes. 
Although these black-box models are producing 
outstanding results, it is very difficult to trust their pre-
dictions due to their opaque and hard-to-interpret 
nature. This has been dubbed by some as the AI inter-
pretability problem. We can define interpretability as 
the ability to describe the internal processes of a sys-
tem (i.e., complex AI and ML techniques) in such a way 
that they are understandable to humans [17].
Interpretable AI can help ensure algorithmic fair-
ness, bias identification, robustness, and generalization 
of Big-Data-based AI models. Interpretation of AI-based 
decision-making algorithms is also necessary to ensure 
smooth deployment of real-world intelligent systems. 
But the development of interpretable AI requires that 
the following questions be answered:
1)	 How to ensure accountability of a model?
2)	 How to ensure the transparency of the model output?
3)	 How to ensure the fairness of the model predictions?
Since BD4D is directly related to human develop-
ment, the Big-Data-based AI model used in these cases 
(i.e., for healthcare systems, judicial systems, etc.) must 
ensure high accuracy and interpretability. A possible 
remedy is to insist on using interpretable ML for high-
stakes BD4D decisions and to utilize explanation meth-
ods for justifying the decisions, where explanation 
means the provision of visual or textual evidence of a 
certain features related to an AI model’s decision. As an 
example of work in this space, Bach et al. [6] proposed 
the layer-wise relevance propagation (LRP) method 
which provides a visual contribution for each input fea-
ture in decision making. In another work, Ribeiro et al. 
[40] proposed two explanation methods namely locally 
interpretable model-agnostics (LIME) and submodular 
pick locally interpretable model-agnostics (SP-LIME). 
Interpretable AI for BD4D is still an open research ave-
nue to explore for Big Data and the AI community.
Better Generalization
In Big Data research, researchers make inferences by 
training models on a larger subset of data with the goal 
2https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Agloe, New York
Understanding the internal workings 
of modern AI systems can help 
ensure fairness, bias identification, 
robustness, and generalization of  
Big-Data-based AI models.
Authorized licensed use limited to: National University Fast. Downloaded on April 30,2024 at 05:56:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
88
IEEE TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY MAGAZINE      ∕   S E P T E M B E R  2 0 1 9
to fit the learned hypothesis on unseen data. In Big Data 
research, generalization is the procedure of spanning 
the characteristics of a group or class to the entire 
group or population. This enables the inference of attri-
butes of an entire population without getting to know 
every single element in that population individually. The 
problem comes along when we wrongly generalize; or 
more precisely when we overdo it. The generalization 
fallacy occurs when statistical inferences about a partic-
ular population are asserted to a group of people for 
which the original population is not a representative 
sample. In other words, models overfit when they learn 
not only the signal from the training data but also the 
noise that impedes the model’s capability to predict on 
unseen data. In order to avoid excessive generalization 
error, researchers should also check the scope of the 
results instead of extending scientific findings to the 
whole population. Regularization is helpful to avoid 
overfitting by reducing the number of parameters to fit 
model in high-dimensional data [35]. It also prevents 
model parameters to change easily, which helps in 
keeping the focus of the model on the persistent struc-
ture. Apart from regularization, other techniques such 
as cross-validation, early stopping, weight sharing, 
weight restriction, sparsity constraints, etc., can also be 
used for reducing the generalization error based on the 
algorithm being used.
Avoiding Bias
Big Data tends to have high dimensionality and may be 
conflicting, subjective, redundant, and biased. The 
awareness of potential biases can improve the quality 
of decisions at the level of individuals, organizations, 
and communities [25]. In a study of 1000 major busi-
ness investments conducted by McKinsey, it was found 
that when organizations worked to minimize the biases 
in their decision-making, they achieved up to 7% higher 
returns [30]. The biases associated with multiple com-
parisons can be deliberately avoided using techniques 
such as the Bonferroni correction [48], the Sidak correc-
tion, and the HolmBonferroni correction [1]. Another 
source of bias is called data snooping or data dredging, 
which occurs when a portion of data is used more than 
once for model selection or inference. In technical eval-
uations of results, it is conceivable to repeat experi-
ments using the same dataset to get satisfactory results 
[49]. Data dredging can be avoided by conducting ran-
domized out-of-sample experiments during hypotheses 
building. For example, an analyst gathers a dataset and 
arbitrarily segments it into two subsets, A and B. Initial-
ly, only one subset — say, subset A — is analyzed for 
constructing hypotheses. Once a hypothesis is formulat-
ed, it should then be tested on subset B. If subset B 
also supports such a hypothesis, then it might be trust-
ed as valid. Similarly, we should use such models that 
can consider the degree of data snooping for obtaining 
genuinely good results.
Finding Causality Rather than Correlations
In most data analysis performed in the Big Data era, the 
focus is on determining correlations rather than on 
understanding causality [37]. For BD4D problems, we’re 
more interested in determvining causes rather than cor-
relates and therefore we must place a premium on per-
forming causal BD4D analysis since causally driven 
analysis can improve BD4D decisions. Discovering caus-
al relations is difficult and involves substantial effort, 
and requires going beyond mere statistical analysis as 
pointed out by Freedman [14] who has highlighted that 
for data analytics to be practically useful, it should be 
problem-driven or theory driven, not simply data-driven. 
As Freedman says, using Big Data for development 
requires “the expenditure of shoe leather” to situate the 
work in the proper context. The focus on correlation has 
arisen because of the lack of a suitable mathematical 
framework for studying the slippery problem of causality 
until the recent fundamental progress made by Pearl 
[37], whose work has now provided a suitable notation 
and algebra for performing a causal analysis.
Stress High-Quality Data Analytics Rather  
Than Big Data Analytics
A better and thoughtful understanding of risks or pitfalls 
of Big Data is crucial to decrease its associated poten-
tial harms to individuals and society. There needs to be 
a stress on utilizing Big Data along with data collected 
through traditional sources to provide a deeper, clearer 
understanding of problems, instead of being fixated on 
only generating and analyzing large volumes of data. 
Although it is generally preferred to have more data, it is 
not always desirable, especially in the cases where data 
is biased. Another disadvantage of large datasets is cost 
in terms of processing, storage, and maintenance. How-
ever, some simple methods like sampling and/or resam-
pling enable us to extract the most relevant data from a 
larger chunk of data. Another very important aspect is 
“I understand that my work may 
have enormous effects on society and 
the economy, many of them beyond 
my comprehension.
’’
Authorized licensed use limited to: National University Fast. Downloaded on April 30,2024 at 05:56:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
89
S E P T E M B E R  2 0 1 9    ∕      IEEE TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY MAGAZINE
to collect the desired data to properly design an experi-
ment rather than collecting all possible information. 
Specifically, in the field of human development and 
humanitarian action, there is no way around corroborat-
ing findings based on Big Data with intelligence gath-
ered at the field level. This requires that international 
organizations and development actors actively increase 
their capacity for data collection and analysis also 
referred to as “Humanitarian Intelligence” [52].
User-Friendly and Responsible Data Analytics
Big Data algorithms are not as trustworthy as typically 
assumed since they draw upon data collected from a 
prejudiced and biased world [4]. Cathy O’Neil [36] 
describes how algorithms often perpetuate or worsen 
inequality and injustice and suggests that there should 
be laws and industry standards to ensure transparency 
for Big Data gathering and utilization. In particular, false, 
outdated, and taken out of context information may 
cause harm to an individual’s autonomy and the use of 
such information should, therefore, be restricted. As a 
remedy to this issue, “the right to be forgotten” enables 
data subjects to reassert control over their personal 
information. There might be fair audits of algorithms but 
first, the awareness of this issue to programmers is 
required as they share a disproportionate amount of 
responsibility in the design of Big-Data-based algorithms. 
Since AI and ML algorithms are embedded in many cru-
cial social systems — ranging from crime fighting to job 
portals to hospitals — it is recommended that social-sys-
tems analysis should also include the possible effects of 
AI on their performance throughout the various stages 
of the design cycle (i.e., conception, design, implementa-
tion, and deployment) in social institutions.
BD4D practitioners should follow the lead of the follow-
ing five principles of data for humanity laid down in [51]:
1)	 Do no harm;
2)	 Use data to help create peaceful coexistence;
3)	 Use data to help vulnerable people and people in need;
4)	 Use data to preserve and improve the natural envi-
ronment; and
5)	 Use data to help create a fair world without discrimi-
nation.
BD4D practitioners will also do well to adhere to the 
following oaths, which were developed by Herman and 
Wilmott as the “Modelers’ Hippocratic Oath” [12] in the 
light of the global financial crisis:
1)	 Though I will use models boldly to estimate value, I 
will not be overly impressed by mathematics;
2)	I will never sacrifice reality for elegance without 
explaining why I have done so;
3)	Nor will I give the people who use my model false 
comfort about its accuracy. Instead, I will make 
explicit its assumptions and oversights; and
4)	I understand that my work may have enormous 
effects on society and the economy, many of them 
beyond my comprehension.
Cautious Perspective on the Use of Big Data
In this paper, we have provided a cautious perspective on 
the use of Big Data for human development. While we 
believe that Big Data has great potential for facilitating 
human development, our aim is to caution against an 
uncritical acceptance and careless application of Big Data 
methods in matters directly affecting human welfare and 
development. We need to guard against a näıve overreli-
ance on data to avoid the many pitfalls of data worship. 
We argue that Big Data technology is a tool, and like all 
tools it should be considered as a handmaiden rather 
than as a headmaster. In particular, we argue that Big 
Data analytics cannot substitute for good research design 
and subject-matter knowledge. Various potential reme-
dies to address the pitfalls of using Big Data for Human 
and Social Development (BD4D) have also been highlight-
ed. To conclude, we will like to emphasize that our paper 
should certainly not be construed as a techno-phobic 
manifesto. We believe strongly in the promise of BD4D 
but when pursued with due attention to the mitigation of 
the many associated pitfalls.
Author Information
Siddique Latif is with the University of Southern Queensland, 
Australia, and with Information Technology University 
(ITU)-Punjab, Pakistan.
Adnan Qayyum, Muhammad Usama, and Junaid 
Qadir are with Information Technology University (ITU)-
Punjab, Pakistan.
Andrej Zwitter is with University of Groningen, 
Netherlands.
Muhammad Shahzad is with National University of Sci-
ences and Technology (NUST), Pakistan.
References
[1] H. Abdi, “Holm’s sequential Bonferroni procedure,” Encyclope-
dia of Res. Design, vol. 1, no. 8, pp. 1-8, 2010.
[2] A. Acquisti, R. Gross, and F. Stutzman, “Privacy in the age of aug-
mented reality,” Proc. National Acad. Sciences, 2011.
[3] A. Ali, J. Qadir, R. Rasool, A. Sathiaseelan, A. Zwitter, and J. Crow-
croft, “Big data for development: applications and techniques,” Big 
Data Analytics, voil. 1, no. 1, p. 2, 2016.
[4] P. Andras, L. Esterle, M. Guckert, T.A. Han, P.R Lewis, K. Mila-
novic, T. Payne, C. Perret, J. Pitt, S.T. Powers et al., “Trusting intel-
ligent machines: Deepening trust within socio-technical systems,” 
IEEE Technology and Society Mag., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 76–83, 2018.
[5] P.M. Asaro, “AI ethics in predictive policing: From models of 
threat to an ethics of care,” IEEE Technology and Society Mag., 
vol. 38, no. 2, vol. 40–53, June 2019.
[6] S. Bach, A. Binder, G. Montavon, F. Klauschen, K.R. Muller, 
and W. Samek, “On pixel-wise explanations for non-linear classifier 
Authorized licensed use limited to: National University Fast. Downloaded on April 30,2024 at 05:56:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
90
IEEE TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY MAGAZINE      ∕   S E P T E M B E R  2 0 1 9
decisions by layer-wise relevance propagation,” PloS one, vol. 10, 
no. 7, p. e0130140, 2015.
[7] D. Boyd and K. Crawford, “Critical questions for big data: Provo-
cations for a cultural, technological, and scholarly phenomenon,” 
Information, communication & Society, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 662–
679, 2012.
[8] D. Brooks, “The philosophy of data,” New York Times, vol. 4, 
2013.
[9] D. Butler, “When Google got flu wrong,” Nature, vol. 494, no. 
7436, p. 155, 2013.
[10] S. Corbett-Davies and S. Goel, “The measure and mismeasure 
of fairness: A critical review of fair machine learning,” arXiv pre-
print arXiv:1808.00023, 2018.
[11] Y.-A. De Montjoye, C.A. Hidalgo, M. Verleysen, and V.D. Blondel, 
“Unique in the crowd: The privacy bounds of human mobility,” Sci-
entific Rep., vol. 3, p.1376, 2013.
[12] E. Derman and P. Wilmott, “The financial modelers’ mani-
festo,” 2009; https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract 
id=1324878.
[13] H. Ekbia, M. Mattioli, I. Kouper, G. Arave, A. Ghazinejad, T. Bow-
man, V.R. Suri, A. Tsou, S. Weingart, and C.R. Sugimoto, “Big data, 
bigger dilemmas: A critical review,” J. Association for Information 
Science and Technology, vol. 66, no. 8, pp. 523–1545, 2015.
[14] D.A Freedman, “Statistical models and shoe leather, Sociologi-
cal Methodology, pp. 291–313, 1991.
[15] K. Fung, Numbersense: How to Use Big Data to Your Advan-
tage. McGraw-Hill, 2013.
[16] N. Giatrakos, N. Katzouris, A. Deligiannakis, A. Artikis, M. 
Garofalakis, G. Paliouras, H. Arndt, R. Grasso, R. Klinkenberg, M. 
Ponce De Leon, G.G. Tartaglia, A. Valencia, and D. Zissis, “Inter-
active extreme: Scale analytics towards battling cancer,” IEEE 
Technology and Society Mag., vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 54–61, June 
2019.
[17] L.H. Gilpin, D. Bau, B.Z. Yuan, A. Bajwa, M. Specter, and 
L. Kagal, “Explaining explanations: An approach to evalu-
ating interpretability of machine learning,” arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1806.00069, 2018.
[18] J. Ginsberg, M. H Mohebbi, R.S. Patel, L. Brammer, M.S. Smo-
linski, and L. Brilliant, “Detecting influenza epidemics using search 
engine query data,” Nature, vol. 457, no. 7232, p. 1012, 2009.
[19] I. Abaker, T. Hashem, I. Yaqoob, N.B. Anuar, S. Mokhtar, A. 
Gani, and S.U. Khan, “The rise of big data on cloud computing: 
Review and open research issues,” Information Systems, vol. 47, 
pp. 98-115, 2015.
[20] D. Helbing, B.S. Frey, G. Gigerenzer, E. Hafen, M. Hagner, Y. 
Hofstetter, J. van den Hoven, R.V. Zicari, and A. Zwitter, “Will democ-
racy survive big data and artificial intelligence,” Scientific Ameri-
can, vol. 25, 2017.
[21] M. Jerven, Poor Numbers: How We are Misled by African 
Development Statistics and What to Do About It. Cornell Univ. 
Press, 2013.
[22] M. Jerven, “How much will a data revolution in development 
cost?,” in Forum for Development Studies, vol. 44. Taylor & Francis, 
2017, pages 31–50.
[23] M. Jerven and M.E. Duncan, “Revising GDP estimates in sub-
Saharan Africa: Lessons from Ghana,” African Statistical J., vol. 
15, pp. 13–24, 2012.
[24] S.J. Walker, “Big data: A revolution that will transform how we 
live, work, and think,” Int. J. Advertising, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 181-
183, 2014.
[25] D. Kahneman, D. Lovallo, and O. Sibony, “Before you make 
that big decision,” Harvard Bus. Rev., vol. 89, no. 6, pp. 50–60, 
2011.
[26] R. Kitchin, “Big data, new epistemologies and paradigm shifts,” 
Big Data & Society, vol. 1, no. 1, p. 2053951714528481, 2014.
[27] I.M. Kloumann and J.M. Kleinberg, “Community membership 
identification from small seed sets,” in Proc. 20th ACM SIGKDD 
Int. Conf. Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. ACM, 2014, pp. 
1366–1375.
[28] D. Lazer, R. Kennedy, G. King, and A. Vespignani, “The parable 
of Google Flu: traps in big data analysis,” Science, vol. 343, no. 
6176, pp. 1203–1205, 2014.
[29] R.A. Lewis, J.M. Rao, and D.H Reiley, “Here, there, and every-
where: Correlated online behaviors can lead to overestimates of 
the effects of advertising,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. World Wide Web. 
ACM, 2011, pp. 157–166.
[30] D Lovallo and O Sibony, “The case of behavioral strategy,” 
McKinsey Quart., Mar. 2010.
[31] A. McAfee, E. Brynjolfsson, T.H. Davenport, D.J. Patil, and D. 
Barton, “Big data: The Management Revolution, Harvard Business 
Rev., vol. 90, no. 10, pp. 60–68, 2012.
[32] E.M. Mirkes, T.J Coats, J. Levesley, and A.N. Gorban, “Handling 
missing data in large healthcare dataset: A case study of unknown 
trauma outcomes,” Computers in Biology and Medicine, vol. 75, 
pp. 203–216, 2016.
[33] B.D. Mittelstadt and L. Floridi, “The ethics of big data: Current 
and foreseeable issues in biomedical contexts,” Science and Engi-
neering Ethics, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 303–341, 2016.
[34] J.M. Morse, “Cherry picking”: Writing from thin data,” Qualita-
tive Health Res., vol. 20, no. 1, p. 3, 2010.
[35] Engineering National Academies of Sciences, Medicine et al., 
Refining the Concept of Scientific Inference When Working 
with Big Data: Proceedings of a Workshop. National Acad. 
Press, 2017.
[36] C. O’Neil, Weapons of Math Destruction: How Big Data 
Increases Inequality and Threatens Democracy. New York, NY: 
Crown, 2016.
[37] J. Pearl and D. Mackenzie, The Book of Why: The New Science 
of Cause and Effect, 1st ed. New York, NY: Basic, 2018.
[38] M. Price and P. Ball, “Selection bias and the statistical pat-
terns of mortality in conflict,” Statistical J. IAOS, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 
263–272, 2015.
[39] J. Qadir, A. Ali, R. ur Rasool, A. Zwitter, A. Sathiaseelan, and J. 
Crowcroft, “Crisis analytics: Big data-driven crisis response,” J. of 
Int. Humanitarian Action, vol. 1, no. 1, p. 12, 2016.
[40] M.T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “Why should I trust you?: 
Explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proc. 22nd ACM 
SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. ACM, 
2016, pp. 1135–1144.
[41] J.C. Scott, Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to 
Improve the Human Condition Have Failed. New Haven, CT: Yale 
Univ. Press, 1998.
[42] T. Shelton, A. Poorthuis, and M. Zook, “Social media and the 
city: Rethinking urban socio-spatial inequality using user-generated 
geographic information,” Landscape and Urban Planning, vol. 142, 
pp. 198–211, 2015.
[43] N. Silver, The Signal and the Noise: Why So Many Predictions 
Fail — But Some Don’t. Penguin, 2012.
[44] U. Sivarajah, M.M. Kamal, Z. Irani, and V. Weerakkody, “Critical 
analysis of big data challenges and analytical methods,” J. Busi-
ness Res., vol. 70, pp. 263–286, 2017.
[45] G.D. Smith and S. Ebrahim, “Data dredging, bias, or confound-
ing: They can all get you into the BMJ and the Friday papers, BMJ: 
British Medical J., vol. 325, no. 7378, p. 1437, 2002.
[46] L. Sweeney, “Simple demographics often identify people 
uniquely,” Health (San Francisco), vol. 671, pp. 1–34, 2000.
[47] H.I. Weisberg, Willful Ignorance. Wiley, 2014.
[48] E.W. Weisstein, Bonferroni correction, 2004; accessed Aug, 13, 
2018.
[49] H. White, “A reality check for data snooping,” Econometrica, 
vol. 68, no. 5, pp. 1097–1126, 2000.
[50] D.H Wolpert, “The lack of a priori distinctions between learn-
ing algorithms,” Neural Computation, vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 1341-1390, 
1996.
[51] R.V. Zicari and Andrej Zwitter, “Data for humanity: An open 
letter,” Scientific American, Feb. 25, 2016; accessed Aug, 11, 
2018.
[52] A. Zwitter, Humanitarian Intelligence: A Practitioner’s Guide 
to Crisis Analysis and Project Design. Rowman & Littlefield, 
2016.
[53] A. Zwitter and M. Boisse-Despiaux, “Blockchain for humanitarian 
action and development aid,” J. Int. Humanitarian Action, vol. 3, 
no. 1, pp. 1-7, 2018.

Authorized licensed use limited to: National University Fast. Downloaded on April 30,2024 at 05:56:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
